Chicago Public Schools divides the city into four ¡®Tiers¡¯ based upon
socio-economic data and test scores from local elementary schools. The
way that CPS does this is complicated, so we will first describe how
that CPS breaks up the city, the variables that CPS uses, and then how
CPS combines these variables to assign parts of the city to tiers.
Splitting up the City For the Tiers system, CPS splits up the city
into census tracts. To protect individual privacy, the U.S. Census
only publishes data about a large group of people. This group could be
the people who live in entire United States, Illinois, Chicago, or a
census tract. Census tracts are small, compared to the City of
Chicago, and are defined by the U.S. Census Bureau.  In Chicago, the
median census tract is 1.8 square miles, which is about 115 city
blocks, but some tracts are much smaller and some are much bigger.

CPS creates a score for every census tract, which determines what Tier
the tract is. Five of the variables that go into that score come from
Census data and one variable comes from internal CPS information.
Census Data Four of the census variables that go into determining a
Tier are relatively straightforward. They are median family income,
the percent of household occupied by the owner, the percent of
families headed by a single parent, and the percent of households
where a language other than English is spoken. These data are readily
available from the census, particularly the American Community Survey.

For one census variable, CPS combines other census data to create an
education score.

The education score is a weighted sum of the fractions of the adult
population who have achieved different levels of education. Only
adults older than 25 are counted.

Education Score=1Less than HS Diploma + 2HS Diploma + 3Some College +
4Bachelors Degree + 5Advanced Degree 5 This produces a scale that
could range from 0.2, if no one graduated from high school, to 1.0 if
everyone has a graduate degree.  CPS Data The first version of the
tier system only used the census variables. In 2010, the Blue Ribbon
Commission evaluated the system and found that the fewer black
students were being accepted. They recommended that a measure of
school performance be added to the tier system. In addition, they also
recommended that 70% of seats be allocated by tier instead of the
original 60%.

http://cpsmagnet.org/ourpages/auto/2010/11/18/38613619/BRC%20Final%20Report%209%2022%2010.pdf

The school performance variable is a complicated animal. It is a
weighted average of schools' ISAT composite scores. Let's start with
explaining what an ISAT composite score is?

ISAT Composite Score 
Chicago public elementary students take the
Illinois Standard Achievement Test (ISAT) every spring from third to
eighth grade. Every year, the students are tested in reading and math,
and in grade four and seven they are also tested in science. To make
the ISAT composite score, CPS looks at all reading, math, and science
subtests, and calculates the percent of these subtests where a student
met or exceeded Illinois's learning targets. So a score of 77% would
mean that 77% of the scores on tests in reading, math, and science met
or exceeded the state standards.

http://www.isbe.net/assessment/htmls/per_def.htm
Weighting

Now, for student living in a given tract, CPS knows what schools the
students go to. To get a school performance variable for a tract, they
average the schools' ISAT composite scores, weighted by the fraction
of students attending each school.

So, let's say there were 300 elementary students in a given tract, and
they all went to one of two schools. A hundred of the students went to
a school with a composite ISAT score of 75 and 200 students went to a
school with a composite score of 60.


School Performance Variable = 10075 + 20060100 + 200= 65

http://cpsmagnet.org/ourpages/auto/2010/11/18/38613619/SEMagnetAdmissions_Principal_Presentation_draft_110210.pdf

Unlike the other variables, only CPS has the information required to
calculate this school performance variable.  Creating the Composite
Score Once CPS has its six variables, it then calculates, for each
variable, what percentage of tracts has smaller value for that
variable. It turns an absolute measure into a relative one. Let¡¯s 57%
of households in a tract are occupied by an owner. We look at all
tracts, and we find out that 72% of the tracts have a rate of home
owernships that is lower than 57%. We then say that this tract is in
the 72nd percentile of tracts in home ownership.


Once we have the percentiles for all the variables we calculate a
composite score:

Composite Score} = Percentile Median Income
                           + Percentile Home Ownership
                            + Percentile Education Score}
                           + (100% - Percentile Single-Parent Family)
                           + (100% - Percentile Non-English Speaking)
                           + Percentile School Performance Variable


The percentiles for for single-parent families and non-english
speaking are reversed. For example, we would say that a tract is in
the 60th percentile for having a non-single parent home, or the 80th
percentile for having a non-non-english speaking household.


